Initial version of the WebSocket Next documentation (#39363)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/websockets-next-reference.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= WebSockets Next Extension Reference Guide
:extension-status: preview
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:numbered:
:sectnums:
:categories: web
:topics: web,websockets
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-websockets-next

> 

Reviewer: I think that both guides should start with a section like "Exprimental status"  that would explain that the API may change in the future. WDYT?

Author: Done.

== HTTP and WebSocket architecture styles

Despite WebSocket's compatibility with HTTP and its initiation through an HTTP request, it's crucial to recognize that the two protocols lead to distinctly different architectures and programming models.

With HTTP/REST, applications are structured around resources/endpoints that handle various HTTP methods and paths.
Client interaction occurs through emitting HTTP requests with appropriate methods and paths, following a request-response pattern.
The server routes incoming requests to corresponding handlers based on path, method, and headers and then replies with a well-defined response.

Conversely, WebSocket typically involves a single endpoint for the initial HTTP connection, after which all messages utilize the same TCP connection.
It introduces an entirely different interaction model: asynchronous and message-driven.

WebSocket is a low-level transport protocol, in contrast to HTTP.
Message formats, routing, or processing require prior agreement between the client and server regarding message semantics.

> For WebSocket clients and servers, the `Sec-WebSocket-Protocol` header in the HTTP handshake request allows negotiation of a higher-level messaging protocol. In its absence, the server and client must establish their own conventions.

Reviewer: This reminds me that we might add something convenient here as well. Currently, the only thing you can do is obtain the header value with `connection.handshakeRequest().header("Sec-WebSocket-Protocol")`.

Author: Can you open an issue so we do not forget?

== Quarkus WebSockets vs. Quarkus WebSockets Next

This guide utilizes the `quarkus-websockets-next` extension, an implementation of the WebSocket API boasting enhanced efficiency and usability compared to the legacy `quarkus-websockets` extension.

> The original `quarkus-websockets` extension remains accessible and will receive ongoing support.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The original `quarkus-websockets` extension remains accessible, will receive ongoing support, but it's unlikely to receive to feature development.
```

Refer to the xref:http-reference.adoc[HTTP guide] for more details.

== Declare WebSocket endpoints

To declare web socket endpoints, you need to create a class annotated with `@io.quarkus.websockets.next.WebSocket` and define the path of the WebSocket endpoint:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.websockets;

import io.quarkus.websockets.next.WebSocket;
import jakarta.inject.Inject;

@WebSocket(path = "/chat/{username}")
public class ChatWebSocket {

}
----

Thus, client can connect to this web socket endpoint using `ws://localhost:8080/chat/your-name`.
If TLS is used, the URL is `wss://localhost:8443/chat/your-name`.

=== Path parameters

The path of the WebSocket endpoint can contain path parameters.
The syntax is the same as for JAX-RS resources: `{parameterName}`.

Access to the path parameter values is done through the `io.quarkus.websockets.next.WebSocketConnection` _session_ object:

[source,java]
----
@Inject io.quarkus.websockets.next.WebSocketConnection session;
// ...
String value = session.pathParam("parameterName");
----

Path parameter values are always strings.
If the path parameter is not present in the path, the `pathParam` method returns `null`.

> NOTE: Query parameters are not supported.

Reviewer: However, you can access the query string of the handshake request with `session.handshakeRequest().query()`.

=== Sub-websockets endpoints

> A class annotated with `@WebSocket` can encapsulate (static) inner classes, which are also annotated with `@WebSocket` and represent _sub-web_ sockets.

Reviewer: I believe that the correct terminology is "static nested classes" ;-)

However, developers can specify alternative scopes to suit their specific requirements:

[source,java]
----
@WebSocket("/ws")
public class MyWebSocket {
    // Singleton scoped bean
}

@WebSocket("/ws")
@ApplicationScoped
public class MyRequestScopedWebSocket {
  // Application scoped.
}
----

Furthermore, each WebSocket connection is associated with its own _session_ scope.
When the `@OnOpen` method is invoked, a session scope corresponding to the WebSocket connection is established.
Subsequent calls to `@On[Text|Binary]Message` or `@OnClose` methods utilize this same session scope.
The session scope remains active until the `@OnClose` method completes execution, at which point it is terminated.

The `WebSocketConnection` object, which represents the connection itself, is also a session-scoped bean, allowing developers to access and manage WebSocket-specific data within the context of the session.

In cases where a WebSocket endpoint does not declare an `@OnOpen` method, the session scope is still created.
It remains active until the connection terminates, regardless of the presence of an `@OnClose` method.

> Methods annotated with `@OnTextMessage,` `@OnBinaryMessage,` `@OnOpen`, and `@OnClose` haves also have the request scoped activated for the duration of the method execution (until it produced its result).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Methods annotated with `@OnTextMessage,` `@OnBinaryMessage,` `@OnOpen`, and `@OnClose` also have the request scoped activated for the duration of the method execution (until it produced its result).
```

=== WebSocket endpoint methods

A WebSocket endpoint comprises the following components:

* Path: This is the URL path where the WebSocket connection is established (e.g., ws://localhost:8080/).
* Maximum one `@OnTextMessage` method: Handles the connected client's text messages.
* Maximum one `@OnBinaryMessage` method: Handles the binary messages the connected client sends.

> * Maximum one `@OnOpen` method: Invoked when a client connects to the WebSocket.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* At most one `@OnOpen` method: Invoked when a client connects to the WebSocket.
```

> * Maximum one `@OnClose` method: Executed upon the client disconnecting from the WebSocket.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* At most one `@OnClose` method: Executed upon the client disconnecting from the WebSocket.
```

Only some endpoints need to include all methods.
However, it must contain at least `@On[Text|Binary]Message` or `@OnOpen`.

An error is thrown at build time if any endpoint violates these rules.

> The inner classes representing sub-websockets adhere to the same guidelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The static nested classes representing sub-websockets adhere to the same guidelines.
```

> IMPORTANT: Any methods annotated with `@OnTextMessage`, `@OnBinaryMessage`, `@OnOpen`, and `@OnClose` outside a WebSocket endpoint are considered erroneous and are flagged during the build process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Any methods annotated with `@OnTextMessage`, `@OnBinaryMessage`, `@OnOpen`, and `@OnClose` outside a WebSocket endpoint are considered erroneous and will result in the build failing with an appropriate error message.
```

== Processing messages

Method receiving messages from the client are annotated with `@OnTextMessage` or `@OnBinaryMessage`.

`OnTextMessage` are invoked for every _text_ message received from the client.
`OnBinaryMessage` are invoked for every _binary_ message the client receives.

=== Invocation Rules

When invoking these annotated methods, the _session_ scope linked to the WebSocket connection remains active.
In addition, the request scope is active until the completion of the method (or until it produces its result for async and reactive methods).

> Quarkus WebSocket Next supports _blocking_ and _non-blocking_ logic, akin to RESTEasy Reactive, determined by the method signature and additional annotations such as `@Blocking` and `@NonBlocking`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quarkus WebSocket Next supports _blocking_ and _non-blocking_ logic, akin to Quarkus REST, determined by the method signature and additional annotations such as `@Blocking` and `@NonBlocking`.
```

* Non-blocking methods must execute on the connection's event loop.
* Methods annotated with `@RunOnVirtualThread` are considered blocking and should execute on a virtual thread.
* Blocking methods must execute on a worker thread if not annotated with `@RunOnVirtualThread`.
* When `@RunOnVirtualThread` is employed, each invocation spawns a new virtual thread.
* Methods returning `CompletionStage` and `Uni` are considered non-blocking
* Methods returning `Multi` are considered non-blocking and must be subscribed to, except if they return their own `Multi`.
* Methods returning `void` or plain objects are considered blocking.

=== Parameters

These methods can accept parameters in two formats:

* The message object (of any type).
* A `Multi<X>` with X as the message type.
* Any other parameters should be flagged as errors.

The message object represents the data sent and can be accessed as either raw content (`String`, `JsonObject`, `JsonArray`, `Buffer` or `byte[]`) or deserialized high-level objects, which is the recommended approach.

When receiving a `Multi`, the method is invoked once per connection, and the provided `Multi` receives the items transmitted by this connection.

> The method must subscribe to the `Multi` to receive these items (or return a Multi).

Reviewer: TBH I find the `Multi` param use case quite confusing. First, the method is not executed when a message is received but immediately after the connection is open and second you must not forget to subscribe to the `Multi` (unless returning it).

Maybe we should introduce a separate annotation to consume messages using `Multi`? Something like `@TextMessageStream`?

Author: I'm not sure we need to introduce a new annotation. Reactive messaging typically reuses the same. Same for the rest client.

Author: We can see if the users are confused.

Cancelling this subscription closes the associated connection.

=== Allowed Returned Types

Methods annotated with `@OnTextMessage` or `@OnBinaryMessage` can return various types to handle WebSocket communication efficiently:

* `void`: Indicates a blocking method where no explicit response is sent back to the client.
* `Uni<Void>`: Denotes a non-blocking method where the completion of the returned Uni signifies the end of processing. No explicit response is sent back to the client.
* An object of type `X` represents a blocking method in which the returned object is serialized and sent back to the client as a response.
* `Uni<X>`: Specifies a non-blocking method where the item emitted by the non-null `Uni` is sent to the client as a response.
* `Multi<X>`: Indicates a non-blocking method where the items emitted by the non-null `Multi` are sequentially sent to the client until completion or cancellation.

Here are some examples of these methods:

[source, java]
----
@OnTextMessage
void consume(Message m) {

> // Process the incoming message. The method is called for each incoming message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Process the incoming message. The method is called on an executor thread for each incoming message.
```

}

@OnTextMessage
Uni<Void> consumeAsync(Message m) {

> // Process the incoming message. The method is called for each incoming message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Process the incoming message. The method is called on an event loop thread for each incoming message.
```

}
----

=== Broadcasting with @OnOpen

Similar to `@On[Text|Binary]Message`, items sent to the client from a method annotated with `@OnOpen` can be broadcasted to all clients instead of just the connecting client:

[source, java]
----
@OnOpen(broadcast=true)
String onOpen() {
    return "We have a new member!";
}
----

== Access to the WebSocketConnection

The `io.quarkus.websockets.next.WebSocketConnection` object represents the WebSocket connection.
It's _session-scoped_  and is valid for the whole duration of the connection.

Methods annotated with `@OnOpen`, `@OnTextMessage`, `@OnBinaryMessage`, and `@OnClose` can access the `WebSocketConnection` object:

[source,java]
----
@Inject WebSocketConnection connection;
----

Note that outside of these methos, the `WebSocketConnection` object is not available.

The connection can be used to send messages to the client, access the path parameters, and broadcast messages to all connected clients.

[source, java]
----
// Send a message:
connection.sendTextAndAwait("Hello!");

// Broadcast messages:
connection.broadcast().sendTextAndAwait(departure);

// Access path parameters:
String param = connection.pathParam("foo");
----

> The `WebSocketConnection` provides both blocking and non-blocking method to send messages:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `WebSocketConnection` provides both a blocking and a non-blocking method to send messages:
```

> - `sendTextAndAwait(String message)`: Sends a text message to the client and waits for the message to be sent. It's blocking.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `sendTextAndAwait(String message)`: Sends a text message to the client and waits for the message to be sent. It's blocking and should only be called from an executor thread.
```
